---
template: SinglePost
title: History of Psilocybin
status: Featured
date: 2020-03-22T04:00:00.000Z
featuredImage: 'https://ucarecdn.com/9ab1bb65-bdcf-4e61-a1ac-489316c42b13/'
excerpt: 'By David Book, PharmD'
categories: []
meta:
  description: ''
  title: The History of Psilocybin
---
By David Book, PharmD

The history of psilocybin is widely documented through many contexts. PsiloHealth™’s mission is to provide education, awareness, and advocacy for psilocybin as a tool for mental health, and our focus will be on the clinical aspect of this controversial chemical. By no means comprehensive, let’s take a high-level approach to where psilocybin started and where it is today. 

Psychedelics obviously have a complicated history, and it’s impossible to cover them individually without touching on any others. The LSD experiment stopped almost as quickly as it was started. With its psychedelic effects discovered in the 40’s (when self-experimentation was the norm) then clinically popularized in the 50’s, LSD came under regulatory scrutiny on the early end of the 60’s after tens of thousands of patients with a variety of conditions were prescribed treatment in one way or another. 

Continued advocacy over the last few decades have led to new inroads for the clinical showcases of psychedelic therapy. The Food and Drug Administration has changed stances over time and recently granted a couple institutes breakthrough therapy status for specific psilocybin use-cases in October 2018 and November 2019.

Looking way back, approximately 7,000 - 9,000 years ago, cave drawings were depicted of figures holding mushroom-shaped objects and participating in ceremonial events. The history of psilocybin is riddled with references to spirituality and religion. That has made it more challenging for some in the scientific community to embrace; yet, it’s fascinating to consider how psilocybin may have impacted positivity and well-being of tribes and indigenous people long before mental health was diagnosed and categorized the way it is today.  

Another piercing example of psilocybin’s historical presence revolves around the encounter between Europe and Central America during Spain’s conquest of Mexico. These initial written accounts of psilocybin use for special occasions come from a Franciscan friar’s perspective, documented between 1529 and 1590. He was prone to mention mushrooms as part of religious ceremonies or healing practices. 

As an example of the interconnectedness of psychedelic history, let’s turn our focus to the ‘modern’ discovery of psilocybin. Of all professions, it turns out a banker popularized psilocybin when a profile appeared in LIFE magazine describing encounters of a ceremony in Mexico. R. Gordon Wasson and his wife Dr. Valentina Pavlovna Wasson (a pediatrician by training) started their expeditions in the 50’s after World War II interrupted some of the blossoming curiosity surrounding these substances. Through years of patiently building relationships with the Mazatec people, it is believed that they were the first outsiders to participate in a mushroom ceremony. This experimental banker ended up sending a sample of this chemical to the same scientist at Sandoz labs who discovered LSD - Albert Hofmann. Fascinating due to the separation of perception implied between nature and pharmaceutical labs today, Hofmann’s actual title at Sandoz was the Director of the Department of Natural Product. By 1970 the Drug Enforcement Administration had classified the substance in its most restrictive category: schedule 1. But similar to LSD’s publicity roller coaster, many clinical accounts were published before psilocybin submitted to The War On Drugs. 

In 2001, after almost 30 years of dormancy, a clinical study kicked off at Johns Hopkins in attempt to further clarify the effect of psilocybin on the human psyche - it would still be three years until the first participant was observed. The complexity of receiving IRB approval to study a schedule one substance cannot be understated, especially when the study outcomes involve mystical experience evaluation. When years of conventional therapy can potentially be thwarted through a single psilocybin administration, even clinical skeptics may do a double take. There wasn’t so much a push to focus on one clinical topic during the pre-prohibition era as much as a laundry list of potential conditions to treat backed by clinical accounts lacking control or randomization standards expected in published literature today. Reemerging studies started small and focused. One pilot study from UCLA assessed the anxiety-reducing effects of psilocybin in 12 patients with terminal cancer over the course of four years. Conclusions can’t be drawn from this sample size, but there was a meaningful difference reported in anxiety levels and diminished fear of death. 

Backed by the success of completed pilot studies, expanded studies are sprouting up nation - and worldwide. The Drug Policy Alliance’s Psilocybin Mushrooms Facts Sheet mentioned the following clinical areas with studies currently underway: cluster headache, anxiety, substance addictions, depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, and neuroimaging experiments. Optimism needs to be tapered because this cannot simply be considered a cure-all. Timothy Leary arguably set back psychedelic research for decades through an aggressive campaign. The two key phrases that need to be taken seriously are **set** and **setting**; without those being optimized, psilocybin absolutely carries a high risk. 

A platform of authors and celebrity philanthropists in combination with an onslaught of positive media coverage has led to a more widespread embrace of psychedelics as legitimate medical therapy. And at the forefront of this reawakening is the scientist that led the groundbreaking study at Johns Hopkins mentioned above: Roland Griffiths. In September of 2019, Johns Hopkins opened the US Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research on the backing of $17 million in private funding. According to the center’s website, “researchers will focus on how psychedelics affect behavior, mood, cognition, brain function, and biological markers of health.” This huge win will open even more clinical doors for psilocybin as the perception of this and other psychedelic substances continue to evolve.   

We hope this article has brought previously unused attention to a topic we at PsiloHealth™ care about deeply. Look out for more educational material and feel free to reach out directly through our contact page.  

References

https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2014/sep/02/psychedelic-psychiatry

http://www.psychedelic-library.org/hofmann.htm

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4086777/

http://www.drugpolicy.org/sites/default/files/Psilocybin_Mushrooms_Fact_Sheet.pdf

https://fortune.com/longform/psychedelic-drugs-business-mental-health/

https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/921789

http://www.artepreistorica.com/2009/12/the-oldest-representations-of-hallucinogenic-mushrooms-in-the-world-sahara-desert-9000-%E2%80%93-7000-b-p/

http://www.psychedelic-library.org/child6.htm

Griffiths, Roland & Grob, Charles. (2010). Hallucinogens as Medicine. Scientific American. 303. 76-9. 10.1038/scientificamerican1210-76. 

Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, et al. Pilot Study of Psilocybin Treatment for Anxiety in Patients With Advanced-Stage Cancer. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(1):71–78. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.116

Rubin R. Philanthropists Fund Johns Hopkins Center for Study of Psychedelics. JAMA. 2019;322(19):1849–1851. doi:10.1001/jama.2019.17126
